# publish

Here's how to publish a new version of a repo with Gro, including for Gro itself.

## svelte-package

Gro uses SvelteKit's [`@sveltejs/package`](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/packaging)
with the task `gro publish` to publish packages to npm.
Gro's default config enables [`@fuzdev/gro/gro_plugin_sveltekit_library.js`](../lib/gro_plugin_sveltekit_library.ts)
if it detects `@sveltejs/package` installed as a dependency in the package.json.

```bash
# enable `gro publish` to publish to npm:
npm i -D @sveltejs/package # enables `@fuzdev/gro/gro_plugin_sveltekit_library.js`
gro sync # updates package.json "exports"
git commit -am "..."
# `gro publish` calls `svelte-package`
```

## login to npm

```bash
npm whoami # check if you're logged in

# not logged in?
npm login # and follow the instructions
```

> more about [`npm login`](https://docs.npmjs.com/v6/commands/npm-adduser)

## using changesets

The [`gro publish` task](https://github.com/fuzdev/gro/blob/main/src/lib/publish.task.ts)
integrates with [Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets)
to publish packages to [npm](https://npmjs.com/). Internally the task calls both
[`changeset version`](https://github.com/changesets/changesets/blob/main/packages/README.md#version)
and
[`changeset publish`](https://github.com/changesets/changesets/blob/main/packages/README.md#publish).

Gro does not include Changesets as a dependency.
Install it globally or local to your repo
(I prefer global, it's not a light dependency):

```bash
npm i -g @changesets/cli # install globally
npm i -D @changesets/cli # or install local to your repo
```

To [init Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets/blob/main/packages/README.md#init)
in a repo or [add](https://github.com/changesets/changesets/blob/main/packages/README.md#add)
a changeset to an already-inited repo, use `gro changeset`:

```bash
gro changeset # inits or adds a changeset
gro changeset --help # view the args docs

# `gro changeset` is equivalent to:
changeset init # if needed -- prefix with `npx ` if installed only locally
changeset
git add .changeset/$FILE
# TODO include a `git commit` flag or default behavior, maybe `gro changeset "message"`
```

After initing, optionally configure and install a custom changelog package
in the `"changelog"` property of the newly created `.changeset/config.json`:

```diff
# .changeset/config.json
- "changelog": "@changesets/changelog",
+ "changelog": "@changesets/changelog-git",
```

```bash
npm i -D @changesets/changelog-git  # a minimal package that requires no GitHub auth
```

Gro inits `"access"` based on the package.json `"private": true` value.
To manually configure the `access` property:

```diff
# .changeset/config.json
- "access": "public",
+ "access": "restricted",
```

See [the Changesets docs](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for more.

## GitHub API setup

Gro currently expects repos to be on GitHub to generate changelogs with Changesets.
(sorry, maybe in the future we'll support other forges)

Gro modifies the barebones changelog generated by `@changesets/changelog-git`,
doing things like linkifying commit hashes or linking to PRs if they exist.
The difference between Gro's version and `@changesets/changelog-github` is that Gro
doesn't require a token for authorization for public repos,
and Gro makes some different choices for usability.

Gro calls the GitHub API using the environment variable `SECRET_GITHUB_API_TOKEN` for authorization,
which is a [GitHub token](https://github.com/settings/tokens)
(with "public access" for public repos, no options selected)
in either `process.env`, a project-local `.env`, or the parent directory at `../.env`
(currently optional to read public repos, but it's recommended regardless,
and you'll need to select options to support private repos).

You'll get a warning if the token is unavailable, but for light usage you won't hit rate limts.

## `gro publish`

The publish task builds the project, bumps the version, publishes to npm,
commits the changes, and then pushes the commit and tag.

Ensure `"dist"` is in the `"files"` property of `package.json`:

```json
"files": [
  "dist"
],
```

Then publish:

```bash
gro publish
gro publish --help # view the options
gro publish -- svelte-package -w # forward options
```

See [the SvelteKit packaging docs](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/packaging) for more.

If `changeset publish` fails during `gro publish`,
the task exits without pushing anything to the remote origin.
It does however create the version commit and tag.
A common failure is not being logged into npm. (see the instructions above)
If the builds are correct but `changeset publish` failed,
and you don't want to undo the version commit and tag,
you can continue manually with `changeset publish` or `npm publish`.
